README.md, before:

# Building an Employee Schedule

Building a schedule for employees can be an extremely complex optimization problem in which managers must balance employee preferences against schedule requirements. In this example, we show how a discrete quadratic model (DQM) can be used to model this problem and how D-Wave's DQM solver can optimize over these competing requirements.

## Usage

To run the demo, type the command:

```python scheduler.py```

A prompt will appear asking for the number of employees:

```Enter number of employees:```

Type the number of employees to be considered and hit `Enter`. A second prompt for the number of shifts will appear:

```Enter number of shifts:```

Type the number of shifts and hit `Enter`.

Once these values have been entered, the program will randomly generate employee preferences for the N shifts from most preferred (0) to least preferred (N-1). A DQM is constructed (see below for details) and the problem is run using `LeapHybridDQMSampler`.

Once the problem has run, two images are created. First, `employee_schedule.png` illustrates the employee preference matrix alongside the schedule built.  Second, `schedule_statistics.png` shows how many employees are scheduled for each shift, alongside a bar chart showing the employees' preferences for the shifts for which they have been scheduled.

## Building the DQM

The employee scheduling problem consists of two components: a requirement that employees are evenly distributed across all shifts, and a goal to schedule employees for more preferred shifts as possible.

### Preferred Shifts

Since shift preferences rank from smallest (most preferred) to largest (least preferred), the rankings can be used for the linear biases in the DQM.  Since the DQM solver looks for minimum energy solutions, and minimum rank corresponds to most preferred, these naturally align.

### Even Distribution

An even distribution of employees across shifts would have approximately `num_employees/num_shifts` scheduled employees per shift. To enforce this requirement, both linear and quadratic biases must be adjusted in a specific manner.

To uncover the linear and quadratic bias adjustments, we must consider the underlying binary variables in our DQM. For a DQM with N shifts and M employees, each employee has a single variable constructed with N cases or classes. These are implemented as N binary variables per employee - one for each possible shift.

For a specific shift `i`, we require that exactly `M/N` employees are scheduled to shift `i`, or that the employee variable takes case `i`, or, returning to our binary variables, that the binary variable corresponding to case `i` is "selected". In other words, the sum of *all* employee case `i` binary variables should equal `M/N`. An equality over a summation of binary variables can be converted to a minimization expression by moving from the equality:

```sum(shift i binary variables) = M/N```

to a minimization expression:

```min( ( sum(shift i binary variables) - M/N)**2 )```

Expanding and simplifying this expression of binary variables, it becomes:

```min( (-2*M/N+1)*sum(shift i linear biases) + 2*sum(shift i quadratic biases) )```

Commit message:

Force number of shifts <= employees

README.md, after:

# Building an Employee Schedule

Building a schedule for employees can be an extremely complex optimization problem in which managers must balance employee preferences against schedule requirements. In this example, we show how a discrete quadratic model (DQM) can be used to model this problem and how D-Wave's DQM solver can optimize over these competing requirements.

## Usage

To run the demo, type the command:

```python scheduler.py```

A prompt will appear asking for the number of employees:

```Enter number of employees:```

Type the number of employees to be considered and hit `Enter`. A second prompt for the number of shifts will appear:

```Enter number of shifts:```

Type the number of shifts and hit `Enter`. Note that we should have at least as many employees as there are shifts.

Once these values have been entered, the program will randomly generate employee preferences for the N shifts from most preferred (0) to least preferred (N-1). A DQM is constructed (see below for details) and the problem is run using `LeapHybridDQMSampler`.

Once the problem has run, two images are created. First, `employee_schedule.png` illustrates the employee preference matrix alongside the schedule built.  Second, `schedule_statistics.png` shows how many employees are scheduled for each shift, alongside a bar chart showing the employees' preferences for the shifts for which they have been scheduled.

## Building the DQM

The employee scheduling problem consists of two components: a requirement that employees are evenly distributed across all shifts, and a goal to schedule employees for more preferred shifts as possible.

### Preferred Shifts

Since shift preferences rank from smallest (most preferred) to largest (least preferred), the rankings can be used for the linear biases in the DQM.  Since the DQM solver looks for minimum energy solutions, and minimum rank corresponds to most preferred, these naturally align.

### Even Distribution

An even distribution of employees across shifts would have approximately `num_employees/num_shifts` scheduled employees per shift. To enforce this requirement, both linear and quadratic biases must be adjusted in a specific manner.

To uncover the linear and quadratic bias adjustments, we must consider the underlying binary variables in our DQM. For a DQM with N shifts and M employees, each employee has a single variable constructed with N cases or classes. These are implemented as N binary variables per employee - one for each possible shift.

For a specific shift `i`, we require that exactly `M/N` employees are scheduled to shift `i`, or that the employee variable takes case `i`, or, returning to our binary variables, that the binary variable corresponding to case `i` is "selected". In other words, the sum of *all* employee case `i` binary variables should equal `M/N`. An equality over a summation of binary variables can be converted to a minimization expression by moving from the equality:

```sum(shift i binary variables) = M/N```

to a minimization expression:

```min( ( sum(shift i binary variables) - M/N)**2 )```

Expanding and simplifying this expression of binary variables, it becomes:

```min( (-2*M/N+1)*sum(shift i linear biases) + 2*sum(shift i quadratic biases) )```
